male narrator:
There's so much information
about health and medicine today,
it can be hard to figure out
what's good for you.
Like the sun.
A walk in the sun feels great,
but we know too much sun
can cause skin cancer.
And what about all the chemicals
in our environment,
preservatives in our foods,
or pollution in our air?
Can they give us cancer
or other disease?
In this video, we're gonna take
a look inside the human body
to find out how the DNA
in your cells can be affected
by chemicals, radiation,
and other things we encounter
in the world each day.
Some of these are mutagens.
That means they cause mutations
in the DNA of your cells.
We'll find out what mutations
and mutagens are
and how mutagens work.
We'll also look at carcinogens
and cancer
as well as methods
of detecting mutagens.
The body isn't powerless
against the outside world,
so we'll find out about
some of its defenses too.
Your DNA functions
as the instructions
for all the proteins
in your body,
and to understand mutations,
we're going to have to take
a closer look at the cell's DNA.
A mutation is a change
in the DNA sequence of a gene.
When the genetic code
has changed,
we say it has mutated.
Sometimes,
mutations happen by chance.
We call these
spontaneous natural mutations.
It's normal for these to happen
from time to time,
and often,
they don't really matter.
The other kinds of mutations
are called induced mutations.
They're caused by something
outside the DNA.
But we'll take a look at the
causes of mutations a bit later.
Remember, most DNA in a human
cell doesn't code for anything,
so a small change in
that section of the DNA
won't have any effect
on the cell.
We call these neutral mutations,
because they don't have
any effect on the organism.
But if the mutation occurs
in a gene,
then the function of the protein
produced by that gene
may be altered.
A change in the genetic code
means we could end up
with a different protein.
The DNA instructions
have been changed.
Mutations can be harmful,
but not always.
Take a fly, for example.
A mutation in the gene
that codes for wing size
might leave it with no wings,
normal wings,
or extra large wings.
It could be that having
larger wings is an advantage,
though, of course, a fly without
wings isn't gonna do so well.
So most mutations are neutral,
and some are helpful.
Today we're going to look
at harmful mutations,
the ones that cause
an undesired effect to the gene.
Changes in the genetic
instructions for humans
can cause genetic diseases
like hemophilia
or cystic fibrosis.
These are inheritable.
They're passed on
from parent to child.
Inheritable mutations
are changes that take place
in a cell that produces gametes
by meiosis.
There are also
somatic mutations.
These are changes
that take place
in the body cells
of an organism
which divide by mitosis.
That cell and its daughter cells
will have the mutation,
but it won't be inherited
by the next generation.
There's a few different ways
that these changes can affect
the genetic code.
Remember how your DNA consists
of a double helix,
and along each strand,
we have a sequence of bases.
A codon is a sequence
of three bases.
The DNA is read
in sets of threes.
Imagine that this is
our set of bases.
Here we're using the alphabet
to demonstrate the instructions
coded into our DNA.
Imagine that each letter
is a base
and each word is a codon.
Remember, each word
has a specific meaning,
just as each codon codes
for a specific amino acid.
Together, the amino acids
create a protein.
"The man saw the dog
eat his pie."
So this sentence is like
a piece of DNA.
It has one specific meaning,
just like a gene codes
for one specific protein.
Now, let's imagine that
one of our bases has changed,
or mutated.
"The man saw the dog
eat his tie."
By changing just one letter,
we've changed the meaning
of the entire sentence.
In the case of a gene,
by changing just one base,
it could code for a completely
different amino acid.
We call this substitution.
We might end up
with a functional protein,
but it won't be the one
the DNA originally coded for.
There are other types
of mutations.
You could have a deletion.
See how deleting just one base
changes every codon?
Now let's try an insertion.
If we insert an extra base,
we get what's known
as frameshift mutation.
Every codon after
the inserted base has changed.
So if you think of DNA
as a set of instructions
for the body's proteins,
these mutations have completely
changed the instructions.
So there are a few different
types of mutations
that can affect a cell's DNA.
So what causes these kinds
of changes to happen?
A mutation is a change
to the DNA sequence of a gene.
A mutation can change
the function of a gene.
This is because it changes
the protein it codes for.
Mutations can be inheritable
or somatic.
Some common types of mutation
include the addition,
deletion,
or substitution of a base.
Anything that can cause
a mutation is called a mutagen.
Mutagens are agents
that cause mutations
in the cells of plants
and animals.
But what kind of things
cause mutations?
The most obvious one
is radiation.
It's important to remember
that there are two
main categories of radiation.
Non-ionizing radiation
isn't dangerous.
That includes things like
radio waves or microwaves.
Ionizing radiation carries
a lot more energy,
and that's why
it's a strong mutagen.
Ionizing radiation includes
ultraviolet radiation,
or UV light.
That's what we get from the sun
or tanning lamps,
and it can cause mutations
that lead to cancer.
X-rays are mutagens too,
but careful use
of safety equipment
makes X-ray machines
safe to use.
Gamma rays and nuclear radiation
are the most dangerous
and are very strong mutagens.
Some chemicals can also
be mutagens,
both natural chemicals
as well as man-made,
or synthetic, compounds.
One example of a group
of chemicals
that can cause mutations
is polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons.
We find these chemicals
in deposits of coal or oil,
and they're produced
when we burn fuel and refuse.
They can also be found
in asphalt, pesticides,
and some plastics.
Because they don't dissolve
very well in water,
these chemicals can sink
to the bottom of waterways
or stay in the air
for a long time.
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
are also one of many mutagens
found in cigarette smoke.
Alkylating agents
are another group of chemicals
that are known
to cause mutations.
A well-known alkylating agent is
a chemical called mustard gas.
It was used in World War I
for chemical warfare.
These chemicals also occur
in industrial waste
that makes its way
into our environment.
A similar kind of mutagen
is a group of chemicals
called intercalating agents.
One example of this group
is a toxin
produced
by the aspergillus fungus
which contaminates grain.
Another group of chemical
mutagens are the base analogs.
Base analogs, alkylating agents,
and intercalating agents
are so good at causing mutations
that they're actually used
to treat cancer.
They work by damaging the DNA
of cancer cells
and stopping their growth.
Unfortunately, these agents
can cause other cancers
to develop as a side effect.
Although we find
chemical mutagens in industry,
environmental pollution,
and cancer treatments,
they can also occur
a lot closer to home.
Cigarette smoke carries
a number of mutagens.
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
are the best known,
but there are about 19 other
chemicals in cigarette smoke
which act on DNA
or make mutations more likely.
Scientists have also shown that
as the body processes alcohol,
it sometimes produces a chemical
which can cause mutations.
A diet high in fatty foods
and meat
is also known to increase
the risk of bowel cancer
because of exposure
to mutagens in the bowel.
Sometimes mutations
can also be caused by viruses.
An example is Hepatitis B,
which can cause liver cancer.
So a whole range of things
can act as mutagens,
but how do they actually
cause mutations?
Mutagens are agents
that cause changes
in the DNA of animals or plants.
Common mutagens include
ionizing radiation
including X-rays, UV light,
gamma rays,
or nuclear radiation;
natural or synthetic chemicals,
like those found
in cigarette smoke.
Viruses can be mutagens too.
There are a number of ways
that mutagens can act on DNA
to cause a mutation.
We've already seen how
a gene can be affected
by even one change
in the base of a codon.
Now let's take a closer look
at how mutagens cause mutations
in the cell's DNA.
We'll begin with UV light
and its effect on human DNA.
UV light causes two types
of damage to the DNA.
The first is the direct effect,
or direct damage.
Now, most of the light
that hits our skin
has little to no effect,
but it only takes a small amount
of UV light to cause sunburn.
Inside the cells,
the DNA is being changed
by the UV light.
If we return to our example
of a gene,
we can see the very specific
change UV-B light causes.
When two thiamine base pairs are
next to one another in a gene,
UV-B light can cause them
to bond to one another
instead of their usual pair.
UV light also causes
indirect damage to DNA.
UV light can create
free radicals.
These are reactive molecules
which can damage DNA
throughout the body.
The body can often repair
the effect of DNA,
but if the damage is passed on
through cell division,
then the result is a mutation,
which could lead to cancer.
We talked earlier about how
chemicals can cause mutations,
but let's find out
how some of these work.
First we'll look
at intercalating agents.
Intercalating agents affect
the structure of the DNA
by sitting in between the bases.
This means that DNA synthesis
can't go ahead as normal
and we end up with mutations.
Alkylating agents
also act on DNA
to change how the bases pair.
These chemicals add small carbon
compounds called alkyl groups
to the DNA bases.
These extra compounds
can stop DNA synthesis.
In some cases,
alkylating agents
can even cause
the wrong bases to pair.
As you can imagine,
this causes serious
and often permanent mutations.
There are also some chemicals
that act to change the DNA
by replacing one of the bases.
We call the base analogues
because they take the place
of the normal bases,
and these cause mutations too.
When viruses infect
a human cell,
they can cause mutations
in a different way.
Some viruses can integrate
directly into
the human chromosome.
This can alter genes
and trigger cancers.
Other viruses turn up
the effects of genes
that control
normal cell division.
We'll look more closely at this
when we talk about cancer.
Mutagens change DNA
by altering the structure
or order of the base pairs.
UV light damages DNA
in two ways:
direct damage to the DNA,
which causes cross linking;
indirect damage
from free radicals.
Intercalating agents
cause mutations
by wedging between bases.
Alkylating agents
change the way DNA bonds.
Base analogues
take the place of bases.
Viruses can integrate
into a cell's DNA,
causing mutations.
Some of the mutagens
we've talked about today
are called carcinogens.
That means they make the cells
more likely to become cancerous.
Most cancers result from
some kind of DNA mutation.
This could be the result
of any of the things
we've talked about today:
pollution, radiation, smoking,
or even just an error
in DNA replication.
The important thing
is that these mutations
are passed on to daughter cells.
For a normal cell
to become a cancer cell,
the genes which regulate cell
growth would have to be changed.
So instead of producing
a protein that limits
or switches off cell division,
The mutated gene might produce
a different protein
or no protein at all.
This kind of mutation allows
cell growth to continue
without any limit.
Genes that make the cell
multiply are called oncogenes.
So we could say that cancer
is uncontrolled cell growth
caused by changing important
genes in the cell's DNA.
One way cells stop this
from happening
is with tumor suppressor genes.
These have the job
of stopping cell division
from getting out of control.
But what happens if the tumor
suppressor genes are mutated?
When these genes are changed
and not repaired by the body,
cells keep on
reproducing forever.
So there are two types of genes
that are important in cancer:
the genes
that make cells divide,
or oncogenes,
and the genes
that stop cells dividing,
or the tumor suppressor genes.
It's not easy for a cell
to become a cancer cell, though.
These mutations
don't happen often,
and the body still has
a few ways of keeping control.
DNA repair genes make sure
that other genes get repaired.
Their role is to make sure
that errors aren't passed on
to daughter cells.
But, of course, DNA repair genes
can sometimes be damaged too.
If the DNA repair genes
are damaged,
then the changes caused
by mutagens aren't repaired,
and so carcinogens
that affect cell division
have a much greater chance
of causing cancer.
Scientists have discovered links
between mutagens
and certain cancers.
For example, cigarette smoke
is known to cause lung cancer.
Cigarette smoke contains dozens
of carcinogenic chemicals.
Asbestos also causes
lung cancer,
which is why it's no longer
used in construction.
Of course, the mutations that
cause cancer aren't very common,
and it takes a long time
for the tumors to grow
to a size that we can see
or feel.
Today scientists are quickly
discovering new ways
to find, detect,
and treat cancers
before they become dangerous.
Cancer is uncontrolled
cell growth.
It's caused by mutations
to genes
that affect cell division.
These are called oncogenes
and tumor suppressor genes.
Chemicals that cause
this kind of mutation
are called carcinogens.
Scientists have linked certain
mutagens to types of cancer.
So we know what mutagens are
and the trouble they can cause.
But you're probably wondering
what can be done
to find the causes of mutations
and take them
out of our environment.
Scientists have developed
a very important test,
the Ames test.
It uses bacteria
with a mutated gene
to discover whether a substance
is carcinogenic.
In this way, chemicals we use
in industry
or medicine can be tested.
Of course,
this isn't a perfect test
as to whether a chemical might
cause a mutation in humans.
The Ames test uses a bacteria
which has been
genetically altered
so that it won't grow
on a certain type of surface.
If our chemicals are mutagens,
they'll cause mutations
in the bacteria,
which will allow it
to grow on the test surface.
So to put it simply,
the more mutagenic the chemical,
the more bacteria will grow
on the test surface.
Sometimes we might need
to test a certain place
or type of environment
for the presence of mutagens.
This can be done by taking soil
or water samples
back to the laboratory
and using tests
like the Ames test
to check whether
they produce mutations.
Because we already know
a lot about mutagens,
scientists can also test
directly for their presence.
For example, lead is a mutagen.
So by testing the soil
and water samples for lead,
we can quickly get an idea
as to whether
there are any mutagens
in the area.
This kind of testing
isn't necessary in most areas,
but if you have a chemical spill
or an accident of some kind,
it's important to know
and check the effects
on the surrounding environment.
In most countries,
governments have laws
about what's allowed
to go into the air, the water,
and the food
that people are exposed to.
Scientists can test
for the presence of mutagens
in our environment, food,
or in chemicals we use.
The Ames test can be used
to find out
whether a chemical is mutagenic.
Scientists can also test
for the presence
of specific mutagens like lead.
DNA is a complex molecule.
It's vital to the structure
and health
of every cell in our body.
Mutagens are things
that can change DNA,
and when the bases of our DNA
are changed,
they can no longer code
for the same protein,
and this can have a drastic
effect on the cell's function.
Luckily, our DNA
usually repairs itself,
and a lot of changes
don't have any effect.
In some of the worst cases,
mutations can lead
to genetic diseases or cancer.
Today scientists have developed
a range of tests
to find out more about mutagens
and to test the chemicals
that we come into contact with.
In the future, we'll know
even more about mutations
and we'll find even better ways
to repair damaged DNA
to stop diseases like cancer.